---
id: 12287
title: 'Eric Schmidt Awards Guardian Project a &#8220;New Digital Age&#8221; Grant'
date: 2014-03-10T12:22:34-04:00
author: n8fr8
layout: post
guid: https://guardianproject.info/?p=12287
permalink: /2014/03/10/eric-schmidt-awards-guardian-project-a-new-digital-age-grant/
categories:
  - News
  - privacy
---
An interesting turn of events (which we are very grateful for!)

\***\***

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
Diana Del Olmo, [&#x64;&#105;a&#x6e;&#x61;&#64;g&#x75;&#x61;&#114;d&#x69;&#x61;&#110;p&#x72;&#x6f;&#106;e&#x63;&#x74;&#46;i&#x6e;&#x66;&#111;](&#109;a&#105;l&#116;o&#x3a;d&#x69;a&#x6e;a&#x40;g&#x75;a&#x72;d&#x69;a&#x6e;p&#x72;o&#x6a;e&#x63;t&#x2e;i&#x6e;f&#x6f;)  
Nathan Freitas (in Austin / SXSW) +1.718.569.7272  
[na&#116;&#x68;&#x61;&#x6e;&#64;gu&#97;&#x72;&#x64;&#x69;an&#112;&#114;&#x6f;&#x6a;&#x65;ct&#46;&#x69;&#x6e;&#x66;o](&#109;&#x61;i&#x6c;&#x74;&#111;&#x3a;n&#x61;&#x74;&#104;&#x61;n&#x40;&#x67;&#117;&#x61;r&#x64;&#x69;&#97;&#x6e;p&#x72;&#x6f;&#106;&#x65;c&#x74;&#x2e;&#105;&#x6e;f&#x6f;)

Get press kit and more at: <https://guardianproject.info/press>

Permalink:  
<https://docs.google.com/document/d/1kI6dV6nPSd1z3MkxSTMRT8P9DcFQ9uOiNFcUlGTjjXA/edit?usp=sharing>

GOOGLE EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN ERIC SCHMIDT AWARDS GUARDIAN PROJECT A “NEW DIGITAL AGE” GRANT

The Guardian Project is amongst the 10 chosen grantee organizations to be awarded a $100,000 digital age grant due to its extensive work creating open source software to help citizens overcome government-sponsored censorship.

[<img class="size-full wp-image-12288 alignnone" alt="eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b" src="https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b.jpg" width="620" height="387" srcset="https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b.jpg 620w, https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b-300x187.jpg 300w, https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b-100x62.jpg 100w, https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b-150x93.jpg 150w, https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b-200x124.jpg 200w, https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b-450x280.jpg 450w, https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b-600x374.jpg 600w" sizes="(max-width: 620px) 100vw, 620px" />](https://guardianproject.info/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/eric-schmidt-portr_2546680b.jpg)  
_[image courtesy of the telegraph.co.ok](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/internet/10018193/The-New-Digital-Age-by-Eric-Schmidt-and-Jared-Cohen-review.html)_

NEW YORK, NY (March 10, 2014)—Ten non-profits in the U.S. and abroad  
have been named recipients of New Digital Age Grants, funded through a  
$1 million donation by Google executive chairman Eric Schmidt. The  
Guardian Project is one of two New York City-based groups receiving an  
award.</pre> 

The New Digital Age Grants were established to highlight organizations  
that use technology to counter the global challenges Schmidt and  
Google Ideas Director Jared Cohen write about in their book THE NEW  
DIGITAL AGE, including government-sponsored censorship, disaster  
relief and crime fighting. The book was released in paperback on March 4.

“The recipients chosen for the New Digital Age Grants are doing some  
very innovative and unique work, and I’m proud to offer them this  
encouragement,” said Schmidt. “Five billion people will encounter the  
Internet for the first time in the next decade. With this surge in the  
use of technology around the world—much of which we in the West take  
for granted—I felt it was important to encourage organizations that  
are using it to solve some of our most pressing problems.”

Guardian Project founder, Nathan Freitas, created the project based on  
his first-hand experience working with Tibetan human rights and  
independence activists for over ten years. Today, March 10th, is the  
55th anniversary of the Tibetan Uprising Day against Chinese  
occupation. “I have seen first hand the toll that online censorship,  
mobile surveillance and digital persecution can take on a culture,  
people and movement,” said Freitas. “I am elated to know Mr. Schmidt  
supports our effort to fight back against these unjust global trends  
through the development of free, open-source mobile security  
capabilities.”

Many of the NDA grantees, such as Aspiration, Citizen Lab and OTI,  
already work with the Guardian Project on defending digital rights,  
training high-risk user groups and doing core research and development  
of anti-censorship and surveillance defense tools and training.

The New Digital Age Grants are being funded through a private donation  
by Eric and Wendy Schmidt.

About the Guardian Project

The Guardian Project is a global collective of software developers  
(hackers!), designers, advocates, activists and trainers who develop  
open source mobile security software and operating system  
enhancements. They also create customized mobile devices to help  
individuals communicate more freely and protect themselves from  
intrusion and monitoring. The effort specifically focuses on users who  
live or work in high-risk situations, and who often face constant  
surveillance and intrusion attempts into their mobile devices and  
communication streams.

Since it was founded in 2009, the Guardian Project has developed more  
than a dozen mobile apps for Android and iOS with over two million  
downloads and hundreds of thousands of active users. In the last five  
years the Guardian Project has partnered with prominent open source  
software projects, activists groups, NGOs, commercial partners and  
news organizations to support their mobile security software  
capabilities. This work has been made possible with funding from  
Google, UC Berkeley with the MacArthur Foundation, Avaaz, Internews,  
Open Technology Fund, WITNESS, the Knight Foundation, Benetech, and  
Free Press Unlimited. Through work on partner projects like The Tor  
Project, Commotion mesh and StoryMaker, we have received indirect  
funding from both the US State Department through the Bureau of  
Democracy, Human Rights and Labor Internet Freedom program, and the  
Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs through HIVOS.

The Guardian Project is very grateful for this personal donation and  
is happy to have its work recognized by Mr Schmidt. This grant will  
allow us to continue our work on ensuring users around the world have  
access to secure, open and trustworthy mobile messaging services. We  
will continue to improve reliability and security of ChatSecure for  
Android and iOS and integrate the OStel voice and video calling  
services into the app for a complete secure communications solution.  
We will support the work of the new I.M.AWESOME (Instant Messaging  
Always Secure Messaging) Coalition focused on open-standards,  
decentralized secure mobile messaging, and voice and video  
communications. Last, but not least, we will improve device testing,  
support and outreach to global human rights defenders, activists and  
journalists, bringing the technology that the Guardian Project has  
developed to the people that need it most.

About the NDA Recipients

Aspiration in San Francisco, CA, provides deep mentorship to build  
tech capacity supporting Africa, Asia and beyond. Their NDA grant will  
grow their capacity-building programs for the Global South, increasing  
technical capacity to meet local challenges.

C4ADS, a nonprofit research team in Washington, DC, is at the cutting  
edge of unmasking Somali pirate networks, Russian arms-smuggling  
rings, and other illicit actors entirely through public records. Their  
data-driven approach and reliance on public documents has enormous  
potential impact, and the grant will help with their next big project.

The Citizen Integration Center in Monterrey, Mexico has developed an  
innovative public safety broadcast and tipline system on social media.  
Users help their neighbors—and the city—by posting incidents and  
receiving alerts when violence is occurring in their communities. The  
grant will help them broaden their reach.

The Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs at the University  
of Toronto, Canada, is a leading interdisciplinary laboratory  
researching and exposing censorship and surveillance. The grant will  
support their technical reconnaissance and analysis, which uniquely  
combines experts and techniques from computer science and the social  
sciences.

The Guardian Project, based in New York City, develops open-source  
secure communication tools for mobile devices. ChatSecure and OSTel,  
their open standards-based encrypted messaging, voice and video  
communication services, which are both built on open standards, have  
earned the trust of tens of thousands of users in  
repressively-censored environments, and the grant will advance their  
technical development.

The Igarapé Institute in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, focuses on violence  
prevention and reduction through technology. Their nonprofit work on  
anti-crime projects combines the thoughtfulness of a think tank with  
the innovative experimentation of a technology design shop. The grant  
will support their research and development work.

KoBo Toolbox in Cambridge, MA, allows fieldworkers in far-flung  
conflict and disaster zones to easily gather information without  
active Internet connections. The grant will help them revamp their  
platform to make it easier and faster to deploy.

The New Media Advocacy Project in New York, NY, is nonprofit  
organization developing mobile tools to map violence and  
disappearances in challenging environments. The grant will allow them  
to refine their novel, interactive, video-based interfaces.

The Open Technology Institute at the New America Foundation in  
Washington, DC, advances open architectures and open-source  
innovations for a free and open Internet. The grant will assist their  
work with the Measurement Lab project to objectively measure and  
report Internet interference from repressive governments.

Portland State University in Portland, OR, is leading ground-breaking  
research on network traffic obfuscation techniques, which improve  
Internet accessibility for residents of repressively-censored  
environments. The grant will support the research of Professor Tom  
Shrimpton and his lab, who—with partners at the University of  
Wisconsin and beyond—continue to push the boundaries with new  
techniques like Format Transforming Encryption.